[SYCL][Doc] Design doc: optional kernel features (#3781)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/SPIRV/SPV_INTEL_spec_conditional.asciidoc

  if specconstexpr (isFancyGpu) {
    fancy();
  }
  else {
    fallback();
  }
  specconstexpr int subGroupSize = /* get value of specialization constant */;
  if speconstexpr (subGroupSize == 8) {
    /* algorithm specific to device with sub group size of 8 */
  }
}
```

In this example, the offload kernel has two `if` statements that do something
conditionally based on the features that the target device provides.  Since
these device features may not correspond to SPIR-V "capabilities", it's more
flexible to use specialization constants for the conditions rather than relying
on some extension to SPIR-V capabilities.  The host runtime has greater
knowledge of the device features, and it can set the values of specialization
constants accordingly.

It is important that the compiler consuming the SPIR-V is guaranteed to remove
the conditional code (in the case when the condition is false) because that
code may call intrinsic functions or make use of SPIR-V capabilities that are
not available on the target device.  If the code was not removed, the SPIR-V
client compiler might fail to compile the code even if the control flow of the
kernel ensures it is never executed.

> === Entire kernels that are conditional

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

regular *OpPhi*.  The value of the condition parameter depends on whether the
parent comes from an *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL* or
*OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL* condition:

* If the parent is a block contained by the "then" range of
  *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL* or *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*, the
  condition parameter is the same specialization constant _<id>_ as the
  *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL* or *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*
  instruction.

* If the parent is the _False Label_ in *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL*, then the
  condition parameter is the _<id>_ of a specialization constant that is the
  logical negation of the specialization constant used by
  *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL*.

* If the parent is a block contained by the "else" range of
  *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*, then the condition parameter is the
  _<id>_ of a specialization constant that is the logical negation of the
  specialization constant used by *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*.

* Otherwise, the condition parameter's value is zero.  (The value zero is not a
  legal _<id>_, so the value zero indicates that there is no associated

>   specialization constant for this parent.)

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

_True Label_ or the _False Label_, according to the value of the specialization
constant.  The specializing tool is also responsible for removing either the
"then" range of blocks or the "else" range of blocks that are associated with
the *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL* or *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*
instruction.  These ranges are easy to identify because they are guaranteed to
be contiguous in the SPIR-V module and the *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL* /
*OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL* instructions provide pointers to the
ranges.

Occurrences of *OpPhiSpecConstantINTEL* are replaced with regular *OpPhi*.
When constructing the parent parameters to *OpPhi*, the specialization tool
uses the parent's condition parameter:

* If the condition parameter's value is zero, this parent has no associated
  specialization constant and the parent's other two parameters are retained
  in the *OpPhi*.  Otherwise, the parent is associated with a specialization
  constant:

* If that specialization constant's value is *true*, the parent's other two
  parameters are retained in the *OpPhi*.

* If that specialization constant's value is *false*, the parent is omitted

>   from the *OpPhi*.

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

results in consistent code.

These additional validation rules start by computing a specialization constant
expression `G(i)` that gates usage of each instruction `i`.  The value of
`G(i)` is computed with the following rules

* Start with `G(i) = true`.

* If the instruction resides in a "then" range of *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL*
  or *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*, let `G(i) = G(i) && S` where `S` is
  the specialization constant referenced by *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL* or
  *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*.

* If the instruction resides in an "else" range of
  *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*, let `G(i) = G(i) && !S` where `S` is the
  specialization constant referenced by *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*.

* If the instruction resides in an *OpFunction* that is decorated with
  *ConditionalINTEL*, let `G(i) = G(i) && S` where `S` is the specialization
  constant referenced by the *ConditionalINTEL* decoration.

* If the instruction itself is decorated with *ConditionalINTEL*, let
  `G(i) = G(i) && S` where `S` is the specialization constant referenced by the
  *ConditionalINTEL* decoration.

We then apply the following validation rules:

> * If a module requires a capability `C` that can be statically checked, and if

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

>   that capability is required only through *OpConditionalCapabilityINTEL*

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

  instructions, we compute the specialization constant expression `G(c)` that
  is the logical "or" of the specialization constants used by each of these

>   *OpConditionalCapabilityINTEL* instructions.  We then scan through the code

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

>   looking for instructions that use capability `C`.  For each such instruction

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

>   `i`, validate that `G(i)` can never be true unless `G(c)` is also true.

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

    *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL* or *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*, or if
    _Variable i_ is defined by a block in the "else" range of
    *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*, verify that _Parent i_ is contained by
    that same "then" or "else" range.

* For each specialization constant (*OpSpecConstantXXX*) that is decorated with
  *ConditionalINTEL*, verify that the specialization constant's _<id>_ is not
  also used as a _Condition_ for *OpConditionalCapabilityINTEL*,
  *OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL*, *OpBranchSpecConstantWithElseINTEL*,
  *OpPhiSpecConstantINTEL*, or *ConditionalINTEL*.

*TODO*: I'm looking for feedback on the validation rules that involve
comparison of abstract specialization constants such as "validate that `G(i)`
can never be true unless `G(c)` is also true".  These validations are likely
very difficult in the general case, but most cases will be very easy.  (In most
cases, I think that `G(i)` and `G(c)` will both be so simple that it will be
easy to prove whether one implies the other.)  How should the spec handle this?
Are the validation rules _requirements_ that a validation tool must perform, or

> are they just rules about what SPIR-V is not valid?  If they are not

Reviewer: SPIR-V spec doesn't say anything about validation tool and its requirements, but from point of view of a developer of such tool, I would implement all available validation rules to provide as precise result as possible.

To me it seems that validation rules are made for SPIR-V generators so they prepare SPIR-V in a particular way, which is expected (and assumed, covered by `assert`s) in generators. Consumer is free to avoid performing any validation at all.

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

The module must declare that it uses the following capability in order to use
any of the decorations or instructions defined in the sections below.  If
declared, this capability must be unconditionally declared via *OpCapability*.
It may not be conditionally declared via *OpConditionalCapabilityINTEL*.

[cols="1,15,5",options="header",width="100%"]
|===
2+^| Capability | Implicitly Declares
| ????
| *SpecConditionalINTEL* +
Module conditionally enables code based on the value of a specialization
constant.
|
|===

=== New decorations

[cols="1,10,5,5",options="header",width="100%"]
|====
2+^| Decoration | Extra Operands | Enabling Capabilities
| ????
| *ConditionalINTEL* +
May be applied only to *OpFunction*, global (module scope) *OpVariable*, type
declarations (*OpTypeXXX*), or constant instructions (*OpConstantXXX* or
*OpSpecConstantXXX*).  Indicates that the decorated instruction must be removed
if the value of the specialization constant identified by _Condition_ is
*false*.  The _Condition_ must be a _Boolean type_ scalar.

If the decorated instruction is *OpFunction*, the function and all of the
instructions it contains are removed when the specialization constant is

> *false*.  If the function has an associated *OpEntryPoint*, that is also

Reviewer: My understanding is that this section is the most formal part of the spec, so it should probably contain other details, like removing of associated `OpName` and `OpMemberName` instructions. BTW, what about debug info?

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

removed.
| _<id>_ _Condition_
|*SpecConditionalINTEL*
|====

=== New instructions

[cols="1,1,2*3",width="100%"]
|===
3+|*OpConditionalCapabilityINTEL* +
 +
Declare a capability that is conditionally used by this module, depending on
the value of a specialization constant.

> The _Capability_ is used by this module only if the specialization constant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _Capability_ is considered declared by this module only if the specialization constant
```

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.

identified by _Condition_ is *true*.  The _Condition_ must be a _Boolean type_
scalar.

1+|Capability: +
*SpecConditionalINTEL*
| 3
| ????
| _<id>_ _Condition_
| _Capability_
|===

[cols="1,1,4*3",width="100%"]
|===
5+|*OpBranchSpecConstantINTEL* +
 +
If the specialization constant _Condition_ is *true*, branch to _True Label_,
otherwise branch to _False Label_.  The _Condition_ must be a _Boolean type_
scalar.

The consecutive blocks from _True Label_ to _True End_ (inclusive) are called
the "then" range of this instruction.  If the _Condition_ is *false*, this
range of blocks is removed from the module.  The module need not declare any

> capabilities used by these instructions if they are removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
capabilities used exclusively by these instructions if they are removed.
```

Author: Resolving this because we decided to go with an alternate design that does not require a SPIR-V extension.
